# Farkas' Lemma

Let $A$ and $\vec{b}$ be given, Then either

* there exists an $\vec{x}$ such that $\vec{x}\ge\vec{0}$ and $A\vec{x}\le\vec{b}$, or
* there exists a $\vec{y}$ such that $A^T\vec{y}\ge\vec{0},\vec{y}\ge0$ and $b^T\vec{y}<0$

but not both.

## Proof

Denote statement "there exists $\vec{x}$ such that $A\vec{x}\le \vec{b},\vec{x}\ge \vec{0}$" as **condition 1** and statement "there exists $\vec{y}$ such that $A^T\vec{y}\ge \vec{0},\vec{y}\ge \vec{0}$ and $\vec{b}^T\vec{y}<0$" as **condition 2**. Given $A$ and $\vec{b}$, define a primal linear program as follows
$$
\begin{align*}
&\text{maximize } \vec{0}^T\vec{x}\\
&\text{subject to } A\vec{x}\le \vec{b},\vec{x}\ge \vec{0} 
\end{align*}
$$
The corresponding dual linear program is
$$
\begin{align*}
&\text{minimize } \vec{b}^T\vec{y}\\
&\text{subject to } A^T\vec{y}\ge \vec{0},\vec{y}\ge \vec{0} 
\end{align*}
$$
By the fundamental theorem of linear programming, there are three possible cases for the primal LP

* **The primal LP is optimal**: In this case there must exist feasible solutions for the primal LP i.e. there exists $\vec{x}$ that satisfies $A\vec{x}\le \vec{b},\vec{x}\ge \vec{0}$. This satisfies condition 1.
  Note that the objective function is $\vec{0}^T\vec{x}$ and thus the optimal value will be 0. By strong duality, the optimal value for the dual LP is also 0 i.e. $\vec{b}^T\vec{y} = 0$. Since the dual LP is a minimization problem, this implies that there is no other $\vec{y}$ such that $\vec{b}^T\vec{y}<0$​. Therefore, condition 2 is not satisfied.
* **The primal LP is unbounded**: The primal LP will never be unbounded because the value of the objective function of the primal LP is always 0. Therefore, any feasible solution will be optimal.
* **The primal LP is infeasible**: In this case, condition 1 will not be satisfied as there does not exist $\vec{x}$ that satisfies $A\vec{x}\le \vec{b},\vec{x}\ge \vec{0}$.
  As for the dual LP, it is either infeasible or unbounded. Note that the dual LP is never infeasible as $\vec{y}=\vec{0}$ will always satisfy $A^T\vec{y}\ge \vec{0},\vec{y}\ge \vec{0}$. The only possibility left is that the dual LP is unbounded. In that case, the optimal value of the objective function of the dual LP goes to negative infinity. This implies that there must exist $\vec{y}$ such that $A^T\vec{y}\ge \vec{0},\vec{y}\ge \vec{0}$ and $\vec{b}^T\vec{y}<0$​. Therefore, condition 2 is satisfied.

Conclusively, we have shown by duality theory and fundamental theorem of linear programming that for any given $A$ and $\vec{b}$, either condition 1 or condition 2 are met but not both. Q.E.D.